Enterprise AI + Cross-App Access blog (#1582)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2025-06-23-enterprise-ai.md

- The client initiates a login request
- The user's browser is redirected to the IdP
- The user logs in at the IdP
- The IdP returns an OAuth authorization code to the user's browser
- The user's browser delivers the authorization code to the client
- The client exchanges the authorization code for an ID token at the IdP
- The IdP returns an ID token to the client
- At this point, the user is logged in to the MCP client. Everything up until this point has been a standard OpenID Connect flow.
- The client makes a direct Token Exchange request to the IdP to exchange the ID token for a cross-domain "ID Assertion JWT"
- The IdP validates the request and checks the internal policy
- The IdP returns the ID-JAG to the client
- The client makes a token request using the ID-JAG to the MCP authorization server
- The authorization server validates the token using the signing key it also uses for its OpenID Connect flow with the IdP
- The authorization server returns an access token
- The client makes a request with the access token to the MCP server
- The MCP server returns the response

## Next steps

> So, with stringent expectations set for buying SaaS apps, this also applies to AI tools accessing these SaaS apps now more than ever. Cross-App Access aims to help manage ALL identity access, including AI, especially in the workplace. You can read more about how Cross-App Access plays a key role in securing AI agents on this [blog by Okta's Chief Product Officer Arnab Bose](https://www.okta.com/newsroom/articles/understanding-the-ai-agent-identity-challenge/). And for a more detailed step-by-step explanation of the flow, see [Appendix A.3](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-parecki-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-03.html#appendix-A.3) of the Identity Assertion Authorization Grant. Interested in integrating your Cross App Access with Okta? You can apply to our [early access offering](https://www.okta.com/saas-security/sign-up/)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, with stringent expectations set for buying SaaS apps, this also applies to AI tools accessing these SaaS apps now more than ever. Cross-App Access aims to help manage ALL identity access, including AI, especially in the workplace. You can read more about how Cross-App Access plays a key role in securing AI agents on this [blog by Okta's Chief Product Officer Arnab Bose](https://www.okta.com/newsroom/articles/understanding-the-ai-agent-identity-challenge/). And for a more detailed step-by-step explanation of the flow, see [Appendix A.3](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-parecki-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#appendix-A.3) of the Identity Assertion Authorization Grant. Interested in integrating your Cross App Access with Okta? You can apply to our [early access offering](https://www.okta.com/saas-security/sign-up/)!
```

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Integrate Your Enterprise AI Tools with Cross App Access"

> author: [aaron-parecki, semona-igama]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: [semona-igama]
```

by: advocate
communities: [devops,security,mobile,.net,java,javascript,go,php,python,ruby]
description: "Manage user and non-human identities including AI in the enterprise with Cross App Access"

> tags: [enterprise-ai, enterprise-ready, mcp, sso]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [enterprise-ai, enterprise-ready, mcp, sso, oauth]
```

tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image: blog/enterprise-ai/enterprise-ai-social-image.jpg
type: awareness
---

> In ["An Open Letter to Third-party Suppliers"](https://www.jpmorgan.com/technology/technology-blog/open-letter-to-our-suppliers), Patrick Opet, Chief Information Security Officer of JPMorgan Chase, writes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SaaS apps not only have to meet the rigorous demands of managing users at an enterprise level but must also be **secure and resilient by design**.

In ["An Open Letter to Third-party Suppliers"](https://www.jpmorgan.com/technology/technology-blog/open-letter-to-our-suppliers), Patrick Opet, Chief Information Security Officer of JPMorgan Chase, writes:
```

> *"Modern integration patterns, however, dismantle these essential boundaries, relying heavily on modern identity protocols (e.g., OAuth) to create direct, often unchecked interactions between third-party services and firms' sensitive internal resources."*

> This means that SaaS apps not only have to meet the rigorous demands of managing users at an enterprise level but must also be **secure and resilient by design**. Modern identity secure standards can help with user lifecycle maintenance of SaaS apps, e.g., provisioning and deactivating employees, and everything else in between. These solutions include adhering to protocols that facilitate single sign-on (SSO), user lifecycle management, entitlements, and full session logout across all applications. On top of managing user and non-human identities, e.g., service apps, adding AI access to work applications will bring another level of complexity unprecedented. We don't have a way to manage these AI tools, but there is a standard solution that aims to solve this problem. First, let's go over how AI is currently set up to integrate across work applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modern identity secure standards can help with user lifecycle maintenance of SaaS apps, e.g., provisioning and deactivating employees, and everything else in between. These solutions include adhering to protocols that facilitate single sign-on (SSO), user lifecycle management, entitlements, and full session logout across all applications. On top of managing user and non-human identities, e.g., service apps, adding AI access to work applications will bring another level of complexity unprecedented. We don't have a way to manage these AI tools, but there is a standard solution that aims to solve this problem. First, let's go over how AI is currently set up to integrate across work applications.
```

## OAuth for Enterprise AI
More AI tools are using protocols like Model Context Protocol (MCP) to connect their AI learning models to make external requests to relevant data and apps within the enterprise. With growing demand and popularity for adopting AI in the workplace, how can we safely integrate AI into the enterprise?

> Solution: There is no need to reinvent how we authenticate and authorize AI to protected resources. With recent updates to the [MCP authorization spec](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization), we can continue to rely on OAuth and authorization servers from external Identity Providers (IdPs) such as Okta, separate from MCP servers, to authenticate/authorize non-human identities, including AI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solution: There is no need to reinvent how we authenticate and authorize AI to protected resources. With recent updates to the [MCP authorization spec](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization), we can continue to rely on OAuth and authorization servers from external providers like Auth0, separate from MCP servers, to authenticate/authorize non-human identities, including AI.
```

## Enterprise AI connecting to external apps

> Right now, app-to-app connections happen behind the scenes from the IdP and per user consent. Naturally, AI-to-app connections follow the same setup, which is not ideal because we need a way to move the connections between the applications, including non-human identities, into the IdP, where they can be visible and managed by the enterprise admin. How can we make this possible?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Right now, app-to-app connections require interactive user consent and happen invisibly to the enterprise IdP. Naturally, AI-to-app connections follow the same setup, which is not ideal because we need a way to move the connections between the applications, including non-human identities, into the IdP, where they can be visible and managed by the enterprise admin. How can we make this possible?
```

> Solution: By leveraging a new (in-progress) OAuth extension called ["Identity and Authorization Chaining Across Domains"](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-chaining/) which we'll refer to as "Cross-App Access" for short. This extension enables the enterprise IdP to sit in the middle of the OAuth exchange between the two apps or AI-to-app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solution: By combining new and in-progress OAuth extensions called ["Identity and Authorization Chaining Across Domains"](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-chaining/) and ["Identity Assertion Authorization Grant"](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-parecki-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant/) which we'll refer to as "Cross-App Access" for short. These extensions enable the enterprise IdP to sit in the middle of the OAuth exchange between the two apps or AI-to-app.
```

## A brief intro to Cross-App Access

> In this example, we'll use Agent0 (hypothetical MCP client) as the Enterprise AI application trying to connect to a resource application called Todo0 and its (hypothetical) MCP server. We'll start with a high-level overview of the flow and later go over the detailed protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we'll use Agent0 (a hypothetical MCP client) as the Enterprise AI application trying to connect to a resource application called Todo0 and its (hypothetical) MCP server. We'll start with a high-level overview of the flow and later go over the detailed protocol.
```

> First, the user logs in to Agent0 through the IdP as normal. This results in Agent0 getting either an ID token or SAML assertion from the IdP, which tells Agent0 who the user is. (This works the same for SAML assertions or ID tokens, so I'll use ID tokens in the example from here out.) This is no different than what the user would do today when signing in to Agent0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the user logs in to Agent0 through the IdP as normal. This results in Agent0 getting either an ID token or SAML assertion from the IdP, which tells Agent0 who the user is. (This works the same for SAML assertions or ID tokens, so we'll use ID tokens in the example from here out.) This is no different than what the user would do today when signing in to Agent0.
```

The IdP validates the ID token, sees that it was issued to Agent0, and verifies that the admin has allowed Agent0 to access Todo0 on behalf of the given user. Assuming everything checks out, the IdP issues a new token back to Agent0.

{% img blog/enterprise-ai/cross-domain-jwt.jpeg alt:"A digram flow of cross-app jwt returned." width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Agent0 takes the intermediate token from the IdP to Todo0, saying, "Hi, I would like an access token for the Todo0 MCP server. The IdP gave me this token with the details of the user to issue the access token for." Todo0 validates the token the same way it would have validated an ID token. (Remember, Todo0 is already configured for SSO to the IdP for this customer as well, so it already has a way to validate these tokens.) Todo0 is able to issue an access token giving Agent0 access to this user's resources in its MCP server.

{% img blog/enterprise-ai/jwt-validation.jpeg alt:"A digram flow of cross-app jwt return." width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

This solves the two big problems:

The exchange happens entirely without user interaction, so the user never sees prompts or OAuth consent screens.

> Since the IdP sits between the exchange, the enterprise admin can configure the policies governing which applications are allowed to use this direct connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the IdP sits between the exchange, the enterprise admin can configure the policies to determine which applications are allowed to use this direct connection.
```
